Moody-Turner, Shirley. Black Folklore and the Politics of Racial Representation. University Press of Mississippi, 2013. Project MUSE, https://muse.jhu.edu/book/27220.
Introduction:
The children of Africa in America are in danger of paralysis before the splendor of Anglo Saxon achievements. . . . The American Negro cannot produce an original utterance until he realizes the sanctity of his homely inheritance. . . . The creative instinct must be aroused by a wholesome respect for the thoughts that lie nearest. And this to my mind is the vital importance for him of the study of his own folk-lore. —Anna Julia Cooper, Address to the Hampton Folklorists, 1894 While the origin of African American folklore studies often is traced back to an 1888 letter in the Journal of American Folklore, in which William Wells Newell announced an agenda for the 235 mostly, if not all, white members of the newly founded American Folklore Society that included the study of “Lore of Negroes in the Southern States of the Union,”1 Anna Julia Coopers 1894 statement on the significance of black folklore signals an alternative tradition of African American folklore studies. In the address from which this epigraph is taken, Cooper recognized that black folklore took shape within a larger context that often regarded African American cultural traditions in dismissive and/or derogatory terms. She recognized that white Western culture was held as the ideal against which black American culture was evaluated and, all too often, judged lacking. Within this context, Cooper advocated for the recovery of African American folklore through the complementary work of black authors and folklorists. Working in tandem, black folklorists and authors could document, recover, and indeed create a black folk tradition as an alternative to dominant cultural representations that often concealed and distorted African American culture and history; in their courageous hands, black folk tradition would be an emboldened David to confront the Goliath of white cultural imperialism and social and political domination. By locating black folklore within an activist cultural and political agenda, Cooper set forth an aesthetics of engagement that defied what would become the domi34  Introduction nant approaches to the study and representation of black folklore in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. By beginning with Coopers remarks rather than with the more recognized statements on the inauguration of black folklore studies, what I suggest is an alternative genealogy through which to approach both African American folklore studies and African American literary engagements with black folklore. This approach recognizes African Americans as active participants, rather than merely passive repositories, in the study and representation of black folklore. As such, this project takes as its subject a disparate group of African Americans—some formal folklorists, some informally enlisted in folklore collection projects, and some authors and scholars who engaged with black folklore in their creative, scholarly, and/or activist projects— whose works provide an essential, but too often neglected, perspective on the meaning and significance of early African American folklore studies. Although I begin by considering the earliest folkloric investigations carried out at the Hampton Institute in 1878 and continue into the early years of the twentieth century, it is the work of the Hampton Folklore Society (18931900)—which, prior to the twentieth century, constituted the most sustained, active, and prolific folklore project undertaken by African Americans—that anchors this project.2 At the end of the nineteenth century the Hampton Folklore Society functioned as a dynamic site for serious engagement with the politics, not just of black folklore, but also of black folklore studies. The societys project took place within the hostile context of the rapidly solidifying system of racial segregation and during the emergent institutionalization of folklore studies. Working out from the Hampton Folklore Society and the context in which the organization took shape, I contend that the Hampton folklorists, as a society and through their publication arm in the Southern Workman, engaged the racial politics of the time by representing black folklore in ways that informed and were informed by the literary and scholarly conversations about black folklore taking place among writers and scholars such as Anna Julia Cooper, Charles Chesnutt, and Paul Laurence Dunbar. Taken together, the literary texts and folkloric works of these diverse cultural f igures establish the vitality, diversity, and complexity of African American theorizing about the significance of black folklore in the post-Reconstruction era. Their work, however, cannot be understood apart from dominant cultural and political discourses about folklore and race taking place at the turn of the twentieth century, and as such, this book also tells the story of how folklore became a linchpin in debates over Jim Crow segregation. By examining the racial politics surrounding the cultural, ethnographic, Introduction  5 and literary representations of black folklore in the second half of the nineteenth and the early part of the twentieth centuries, Black Folklore and the Politics of Racial Representation participates in the monumental and ongoing process of making visible the ways race has been simultaneously constructed and obscured. While the complicated story of how race became a global worldview stretches back well into the sixteenth century, as Audrey Smedley contends, it was not until the late nineteenth century that the social construction of race reached its full development, when “the legal apparatus of the United States and various state governments conspired with science to legitimize this structural inequality by sanctioning it in law.”3 Folklore—as f ield of scientific inquiry, as discursive practice, and as representational strategy—came to play an important role in justifying racial constructions and legitimating Jim Crow as the new status quo. Within the plantation and minstrel traditions, for instance, folklore referred to the cultural materials that could be re-presented on the stage and in literature as a way to evoke an entire set of cultural practices and behaviors rife with implications for the constructions of race taking shape throughout the nineteenth century. Legal and political discourse often drew on meanings of folklore associated with tradition, customary behaviors, and popular usages in articulating justifications for upholding segregation based not only on racial difference, but also based on the notion that Jim Crow laws merely adhered to the popular norms and customs of the day. Within scientific and philosophic discourses, folklore could justify the racialized models of social and cultural evolution, providing evidence of a groups location on the evolutionary ladder. Conversely, folklore, particularly in a Boasian framework, could serve as evidence of the permeable boundaries of culture, detaching culture from race by showing how folklore could be transferred, adopted, and adapted between cultures, demonstrating what Brad Evans refers to as the ability of culture to “circulate.”4 T he relationship between conceptualizations of folklore and the construction of racialized structures of power and difference has received important attention over the years. George Fredericksons seminal study, The Black Image in the White Mind, argues that white notions of black identity, including popular depictions of black folklore, were driven by the ideological, social, and political desire to maintain (an illusory) white racial homogeneity and to protect the existing white power structure. George Stockings works, particularly Race, Culture, and Evolution, track the relationships between race, evolution, and scientism in anthropology, with implications for related disciplines, such as folklore, while folklore historian and scholar Simon Bronner 6  Introduction considers the formation of folklore studies in relation to U.S. national identity formations more generally. Sw. Anand Prahlad and John Roberts most directly interrogate the relationship between folklore studies and constructions of race, considering how the folkloric study of a racialized, removed, and pre-modern other enabled the construction of a modern, civilized white identity.5 Each of these works focuses on how blacks were constructed as folk—primitive, uncivilized, and/or quaint and simple “others”—in an effort to buttress constructions of whites as inherently civilized, modern, rational, and ultimately superior beings endowed with the right and responsibility to rule over and/or be separated from inferior nonwhite others. T he master narrative of white cultural domination is well established in this literature, but in re-examining these dominant discourses, I further argue that we need to make central the range of theorizing about folklore and race generated by African American folklorists and cultural workers. In other words, we need to examine the intricate workings and deep structures of the relationship between folklore as a formalized institution of study, as documentable cultural material, and as lived social practice and the concomitant constructions of racial difference and hierarchy considering how this emerging concept of folklore was experienced and understood by those who were so frequently the objects of those discourses.6 Our readings will enable us to refocus attention on the aspects of nineteenth-century discourses of folklore and race that African American writers and cultural workers variously engaged, negotiated, and critiqued when they took folklore as the subject of and/or basis for their creative, folkloric, and/or ethnographic work, compelling us to ask, for example: How did folklore and the folklore project register differently for African American writers and folklorists? How did folklore serve as an aspect of racial and/or cultural pride or, conversely, personal shame and humiliation? How did they interrogate the strictures as well as the slippages that characterized this multivariate concept? How did they engage folklore to expose its politicized and racialized role in constructing discourses of civilization? How did they interpret the relationship between folklore and modernity, race, gender, education, citizenship, and national belonging? In other words, how did they plumb the contours, nuances, and contradictions animating the relationship between folklore and race? Recovering these voices requires expanding our definition of what “counts” as folklore studies and as theorizing.7 Indeed, the African American folklorists at Hampton did not partake in folklore studies in the ways Newell prescribed and outlined for the members of American Folklore Society. T hey did not pursue careers or hobbies as full-time folklorists, and did not Introduction  7 maintain objective distance in their work. Often they gathered “fieldwork” from their memories and lived experiences rather than from observations in the “field,” and they experimented with various modes of representation. T heir projects were admittedly both deeply personal and political. They tied folklore to cultural history and individual and collective identity, and they variously used folklore and folklore studies as a means to engage in contemporary debates and to document a viable African American tradition and culture. Their counterparts working in the literary realm similarly refused to allow the dominant conventions informing the collection and representation of black folklore to determine their ethnographic and artistic engagements with black folklore. The folklorists literary peers called attention to the racialized politics dictating the representation of black folklore, remaining painfully aware of the social and political stakes inherent in depictions of black folklore, and using folklore as a vehicle to advocate for civic reform and to protest continued racial and gendered inequalities. As Barbara Christian explains in “The Race for Theory”: “people of color have always theorized—but in forms quite different from the Western form of abstract logic.” She continues, “I am inclined to say that our theorizing (and I intentionally use the verb rather than the noun) is often in narrative forms, in the stories we create, in riddles and proverbs, in the play with language, since dynamic rather than fixed ideas seem more to our liking.”8 Taking Christians cue, I draw on a range of texts, showing how African Americans theorized about the significance of folklore in an array of unlikely places—in prefatory remarks and obligatory disclaimers, couched within folktales and ethnographic reports, and veiled within letters, short stories, poems, and novels. Even Cooper, who engaged the most directly in constructing a literary theory of black folk aesthetics, utilized personal narratives, anecdotes, and recollections as vehicles for exploring the oppositional and liberatory possibilities of creating reciprocal relationships between African American literature and folklore. Aside from the Hampton folklorists, however, many of the individuals in this study would not be recognized as folklorists in the traditional sense and their works would not be considered when recovering the history of African American folklore scholarship. And while it is not my intention to categorize or recover these figures as folklorists, I do argue that they contributed theories, perspectives, and analyses that should be included in our investigations of early African American folklore studies. Certainly, Charles Chesnutts contributions to early African American folklore studies are as significant as the works of Joel Chandler Harris or William Wells Newell. It is my contention, 8  Introduction then, that we need to consider the work of the Hampton folklorists not only in relation to the dominant white institutions, but in relation to the black intellectual community as well. The various figures in this study maintained connections, either directly or indirectly, with the Hampton Folklore Society. Cooper, for instance, maintained the most sustained relationship with the Hampton folklorists and offered an important perspective on both the politics of folklore studies and the need to cultivate a relationship between black folklore and African American literature. Dunbar and Chesnutt were both one remove from the society, sharing the same publication outlets, becoming involved in a variety of ways with the Hampton Institute, and through that involvement garnering various levels of contact with members of the society and their work. Beyond these material connections, Dunbar and Chesnutt are important figures because their decisions to engage folklore within the given cultural and political climate earned them dubious praise as impromptu folklorists whose works were often lauded for what were taken as authentic portrayals of black folk life. Like the Hampton folklorists, then, they had to find innovative strategies to negotiate and challenge their assigned role as “native informants,” and thus their works are in conversation with the works of the Hampton folklorists in important and illuminating ways. Recovering this expanded intellectual and historical context has important implications for, and joins conversations taking place in, both folklore studies and African American literary studies. Within folklore studies, attention to the cultural representation of folklore has prompted a general reevaluation of disciplinary origins—forcing contemporary folklorists to consider, for example, the role folklore scholarship has played in romanticizing African American communities or in creating the very notions of authenticity folklorists now often seek to challenge. In moving toward this end, a number of revisionist histories of folklore studies have considered how “particular groups got excluded and others essentialized” in the study of folklore.9 While works such as Simon Bronners American Folklore Studies, Rosemary Levy Zumwalts American Folklore Scholarship, and Regina Bendixs In Search of Authenticity make vital contributions to the revisionist historiography of folklore studies, these works do not take into account the contributions of early African American folklorists in their surveys, and thus conversations about the politics of cultural representation continue to take place without fully considering how African American folklorists might have contributed to and been affected by those developments.10 By presenting African Americans “as always the folk, but never the folklorists,” both traditional and revisionist histories of folklore studies continue to perpetuate the idea, as Melvin Introduction  9 Wade states, that blacks appear as “peripheral participants in the evolution of their own intellectual history, fully involved in the performing of folklore, but rarely reflective about their involvement.”11 Folklorist Elaine Lawless suggests we need to move away from self-reflexive attention to the politics of cultural representation that have characterized many revisionist projects in folklore studies to what she refers to as “reciprocal ethnography,” asserting the need to shift from a myopic focus on the role of the ethnographer to an ethnographic practice where the “exchange of ideas and meanings is reciprocal.” Lawless explains that in utilizing this reciprocal approach, we invite multiple voices to the table, recover the perspective of the “subjects” in the process of conducting fieldwork and writing ethnography, “learn from each other,” and resist privileging one voice over the other.12 Extending Lawlesss framework to disciplinary historiography, I would argue, similarly, that it is not enough to be self-reflexive about the disciplinary origins of folklore studies—to recognize the ways in which folklore studies participated in creating a romanticized view of blacks as folk—but also that we must now invite previously silenced voices to the table as participants. Heeding Wades and Lawlesss critiques, and responding to efforts by folklore scholars such as Adrienne Lanier Seward and John Roberts, there has been a turn in contemporary African American folklore studies both to recognize the politics of white folklorists interpretations of African American folklore and to recover the role of African American folklorists in the development of the field. Sewards “The Legacy of Early Afro-American Folklore Scholarship” and Prahlads “Africana Folklore” survey the history of African American folklore scholarship and African American folklorists contributions to folklore scholarship, while Cassandra Stancils study of Carter G. Woodson and Gerald L. Daviss work on Thomas Washington Talley recover understudied or unacknowledged African American forerunners of African American folklore studies.13 This small but critical body of scholarship focuses much-needed attention on the recovery of African American voices in the larger revisionist and recovery projects taking place in folklore studies more generally. But while they document a tradition of African American folklore scholarship, all of their works recognize African American folklorists from the twentieth century forward. Hence, the work begun by these scholars beckons us to delve deeper, asking: Who were the nineteenth-century progenitors of twentieth-century African American folklore studies? How did they contribute to and intervene in the inaugural conversations about folklore studies that were taking place in national organizations like the Ameri10  Introduction can Folklore Society? How do their works provide us with insights into the tradition of African American theorizing about African American folklore? In an effort to address these questions, my attention to the Hampton folklorists joins the handful of studies offering sustained attention to the work of nineteenth-century African American folklorists. Lee Bakers Anthropology and the Racial Politics of Culture and Daphne Lamothes Inventing the New Negro include significant readings of the Hampton Folklore Society in relation to the civilizing mission of the Hampton Institute, and within the framework of William Wells Newells scientific agenda, respectively. A recent dissertation by Ray Sapirstein explores how folklore studies at the Hampton Institute provided an orientation toward black folklore that informed related cultural projects, especially those conducted by the prominent white photographer Leigh Miner and the Hampton Institute Camera Club. Donald Waterss foundational history, Strange Ways and Sweet Dreams, interprets the work of the Hampton folklorists in relation to the civilizing project of the larger white institutions with which they were associated and offers an analysis of the Hampton folklore collection in terms of what those materials reveal about the values, beliefs, and worldview of slaves and former slaves living in the rural South.14 Like Baker, Lamothe, Sapirstein, and Waters, I too am interested in the relationship between the Hampton folklorists and the larger dominant institutions, and indeed, I argue that their work cannot be understood apart from this context. I am particularly interested, however, in recovering how the Hampton folklorists conceived of their project; how they negotiated their relationship to folklore within this context; how they interacted with other African American scholars and cultural workers who were also interested in the issues and challenges inherent in the collection, study, and representation of black folklore; and how, taken together, their work suggests a larger African American intellectual community approaching similar questions in sometimes complementary, sometimes contradictory, but always mutually informative ways. Recovering this nexus of intersecting interests and concerns suggests not just an alternative genealogy for African American folklore studies, but also offers an alternative lens through which to view post-Reconstruction African American literary engagements with black folklore. Too often, postReconstruction African American writers literary, aesthetic, and political engagements with black folklore have been situated merely as foils to later, more sophisticated treatments of black folklore that took shape during the Harlem Renaissance and were improved and perfected with each subsequent Introduction  11 generation.15 This assumption not only discounts the creative, aesthetic, and political accomplishments of post-Reconstruction African American writers, it also reproduces a teleology that views the African American literary tradition as moving toward a more perfect and sophisticated enunciation of a black literary aesthetic. While our contemporary period has seen a flurry of attention to the construction of the black “folk” in relation to questions of authenticity and racial identity, these works tend to locate sophisticated treatments of the politics of cultural representation and critiques of the relationship between folklore, identity, and authenticity as commencing in the 1920s with the Harlem Renaissance and associated movements.16 However, as Henry Louis Gates notes, during the post-Reconstruction period, which he characterizes as a “new form of enslavement for blacks,” the nations political and economic backsliding and expansion of racist iconography was met by a dramatic resurgence of African American literary publishing through which African Americans “regained a public voice.”17 Gatess observation indicates that—despite the mounting social and political repression and the increasingly derogatory and circumscribed images of African Americans in popular culture and literature—African Americans in the post-Reconstruction era grew ever more determined to wrest back some control over the cultural representations that had become part and parcel of the solidifying edifice of racial segregation. Echoing Gatess assessment of the increase in African American literary production during the post-Reconstruction period, Barbara McCaskill and Caroline Gebhard, in their 2006 collection PostBellum, Pre-Harlem, African American Literature and Culture 1877–1919, argue against viewing the post-Reconstruction period as characterized by artistic stasis and black political subservience. Instead, they call for “new paradigms for understanding the unfolding of black art and politics” in the critical decades surrounding the turn of the twentieth century, insisting on a reappraisal of the era to establish it as a crucial stage in African American cultural and literary history, a period of high aesthetic experimentation and political dynamism.18 In creating these new models of interpretation, one not only has to move beyond the assumptions about the aesthetic stagnation of post-Reconstruction period literature, one must also incorporate and expand upon what have been the most far-reaching and influential approaches to interpreting the intersections of folklore and African American literature. Starting in the 1980s, vernacular theorists in the line of Gates and Houston Baker advanced a critical paradigm, exemplified by Gatess foundational study The Signifying Monkey, which turned to the tropes and figures of folk or vernacular expression 12  Introduction as interpretative tools for analyzing African American literary texts.19 In this seminal work, Gates argues that vernacular tradition “informs and becomes the foundation for formal black literature”; and in turn he proposes a literary criticism that is likewise informed by the strategies of language construction and interpretation arising out of African American vernacular practices.20 Gates identifies “signifying”—which he defines as a “double-voiced trope,” “a metaphor for formal revision,” or the practice of engaging or rewriting with a difference—as the key practice adapted from African American (and by extension African) vernacular traditions and written into African American literary texts.21 Thus, he asserts, an “indigenous black literary criticism” will take its cue from black vernacular culture and develop models for reading and interpreting the “signifying black difference” in African American literary texts.22 Significantly, Gatess work has served the important function of focusing attention on the stylistic features of folk forms and their textual transformations. He also extends this hermeneutic to provide a basis for analyzing the ways in which African American literary texts engage, while simultaneously critiquing and challenging, Western literary traditions. Gates has run into trouble with a bevy of contemporary critics, however, with his suggestions that “the black vernacular has assumed the singular role as the black persons ultimate sign of difference” and that those writers who incorporate black vernacular traditions do so “to ground [their] literary practice outside the Western tradition.”23 Both of these gestures seem to posit the individual or literary work that draws on vernacular traditions as more “authentically” black than those that do not rely on or reproduce cultural forms arising out of black vernacular. J. Martin Favor extends this critique, asserting that Gatess privileging of the black vernacular assigns a greater value or a “larger measure of authenticity” to literary representations emerging from constructions of the folk as lower class.24 Favor maintains that this privileging of a lower class folk identity as what is authentic about blackness creates and enforces a literary canon restricted to black subjectivities that fit into the vernacular theory model. Gatess identification of the form of signifying as the most significant of vernacular practices has drawn criticism as well. In her recent study Renegade Poetics, Evie Shockley argues that vernacular theorists such as Gates and Baker proposed a theory of African American literature that sought to “privilege the evidence of the text over the political ideology of the moment.”25 Shockley asserts that instead of locating blackness in adherence to a particular political ideology, which they associated with the art and politics Introduction  13 of their Black Arts Movement predecessors, they instead sought to locate blackness within the cultural context and literary form and structure of a text. As a result, however, they were still attempting to “identify that which is black about these textual structures and, therefore, the texts that employ them.”26 The implication, then,  is that African American literary texts that incorporate, in either structure or content, specific oral vernacular forms, typically forms associated with lower-class or rural communities, are regarded as more authentically black than texts that do not. While I do not wish to jettison Gatess approach altogether, particularly his insights on how folk forms are often transformed in literary texts to posit an oppositional or “signifying” relationship with Western literary and dominant popular cultural discourses, I do wish to complicate his notion of the vernacular tradition as a measure of racial authenticity not only by emphasizing how writers incorporated folklore, but also by considering how they did so within a specific historical context and in relation to larger social, political, and cultural agendas. What I suggest is a way of reading driven not by identifying the “black difference” of a particular text, nor restricted to locating the origins for the formal features of folklore as it is transformed in a literary text (though both of these areas emerge at various points as sites of concern and negotiation), but instead by recognizing the contingent and constructed nature of categories such as “folk,” “folklore,” “authenticity,” “blackness,” and “race.” As Robin Kelley has noted, categories such as “folk” and “modern” are “socially constructed and contingent . . . subject to the dynamics of class, gender and race.”27 In other words, these terms have a history that has everything to do with constructions of racial and national identity, and negotiating, exposing, and grappling with this history is one of the key features in the black folk “aesthetics”/strategies enacted by the writers I consider. In the post-Reconstruction era, for example, black writers engagement with folklore had to negotiate the emerging formation of folklore studies and the dominant cultural and scientific identification of Southern, rural African Americans as folk. They had to navigate the tension between their representations of folklore and the awareness that representations of certain forms of folklore and certain folk groups were one measure used by white society in determining the authenticity of black writers texts and reifying notions of blackness that circulated in the national imaginary. Indeed, the writers I consider were as much engaged in the project of problematizing dominant societys notions of an authentic blackness, located in the folk practices of Southern, rural blacks, as they were interested in providing more accurate portrayals of black life.14  Introduction What I propose, then, is not to expand Gatess hermeneutic to include one or two additional types of folk forms, but instead, to read engagements with folklore through a lens attentive to the cultural and political work carried out through these various representations. This approach allows us to see, for example, how The Colonels Dream, which is not overtly rooted in black vernacular forms, is as much about folklore and the politics of cultural representation as The Conjure Woman, which is rooted in the folk practices of storytelling and conjure. It also allows us to recognize how, already in the 1890s, Dunbars The Sport of the Gods exposed the role that representations of folklore could play in constructing racial difference, while simultaneously mounting a critique of idealized notions of black folklore as rooted in the rural South. More generally, this approach expands our context for understanding the deployment of black folklore in literary texts and public discourses, allows us to diversify what counts as folklore, and recognizes how constructions of folklore were tied to a racial and cultural politics that were inseparable from questions of national identity and belonging. Chapter one begins by establishing the methodological, theoretical, and hermeneutical parameters advanced by William Wells Newell for the study of folklore, and specifically African American folklore. Then, locating the emergence of folklore studies in relation to the larger social, cultural, and political interests in folklore that converged during the second half of the nineteenth century, I historicize constructions of racial identity as carried out through representations of black folklore. I consider how constructions of the black folk in ante- and postbellum popular culture, as specifically located in the ironic figure of Jim Crow and the subsequent minstrel tradition, as well as Plantation Tradition literature, fed the national interest in black folklore and fueled white fascination with “authentic” black folks and/or black folk material. Reading at the intersections of “scientific” and popular representations of black folklore, and against the backdrop of the mounting debates over racial identity and segregation, chapter one suggests the complex protocols that influenced approaches to and representations of black folklore in the mid- to late nineteenth century. Chapter two reviews the origins of black folklore studies at the Hampton Institute, with the first folklore collections conducted in 1878 under the auspices of Samuel Armstrong, the Institutes founder, and later reinvigorated by Alice Bacon and carried out by the Hampton Folklore Society. This chapter posits the influential role Armstrong played in establishing a reformist/assimilationist agenda for black folklore studies. I expand this context, however, to locate the roots of Armstrongs orientation toward folklore, educaIntroduction  15 tion, and civilization in his early missionary work in Hawaii. Investigations into Armstrongs youth allow us to align his conflicted approach to black folklore with assimilationist projects at home and U.S. imperialist expansion in the Pacific. As I illustrate in this chapter, Armstrongs disparagement of the African American practice of conjure is presaged in the missionary efforts to outlaw the hula, an effort Armstrong observed first-hand while living and working in Hawaii. Armstrongs mission to excise folk practices from his African American students ironically led to the first extensive collection of black folklore materials at Hampton, as he enlisted his students in “spying out” and documenting, rather than concealing, what he saw as outdated and dangerous folk practices. T he second part of the chapter turns to the resurgence of folklore studies at the Hampton Institute when Bacon, a white teacher from Connecticut, established the Hampton Folklore Society in 1893. Unlike her predecessor, Bacon enlisted African American students and graduates of the Institute in what she identified as the serious and scientific study of black folklore. She established professional connections with the American Folklore Society, through which she endorsed and promoted a scientific approach to black folklore studies. She also, however, brought her own reformist background to the project, and thus her agenda for the society often embodied a tension between pursuing the scientific mission espoused by Newell and validating the perspectives and interpretations of the Hampton folklorists on the context-specific meaning of their own folk traditions. Despite her own orientation toward black folklore collection and study, Bacon created the Hampton Folklore Society as an open forum, thereby enabling ongoing and active participation from the wider black intellectual community. Thus it was under Bacons leadership that the Hampton Folklore Society became a crucial site where the larger community, both black and white, engaged in dialogue and debate about the meaning and significance of black folklore. Chapter three recovers the vested interest members of the black intellectual community—particularly, Anna Julia Cooper—had in the work of the Hampton Folklore Society, which came to be a site of lively discourse concerning black folklores relationship to social change and justice. I argue that the work of the Hampton Folklore Society must be understood within, but also beyond, the bounds of both the Hampton Institute and the “scientific” frame offered by Bacon and the American Folklore Society. Recovering and re-reading several key moments in the societys history, I show how the folklorists resisted having their work confined to the ideology of the Hampton Institute as they questioned the politics of assuming a “scientific,” and often 16  Introduction objectifying, approach to the study of their own traditions. The second half of this chapter focuses on recovering Coopers contributions to folklore studies and detailing the tension between her attempting to validate black folklore as a source for a distinctive African American literary tradition while still positing an anti-essentialist, non-objectifying approach to folklore study. I reveal how her emphasis on memory and personal experience was reflected in the methodology that some of the Hampton folklorists came to employ and how she saw black folklore as the basis for achieving an innovative, socially and politically engaged African American literary aesthetic. Chapters four and five examine how the national conversation about black folklore intersected with the literary production and social change agendas of African American authors. I focus on the work of Paul Laurence Dunbar and Charles Chesnutt—the two African American authors who achieved mainstream notice, who maintained formal and/or informal relations with the Hampton Institute and Hampton Folklore Society, and in whom members of the society and the institute were most invested as representatives of and potential spokesmen for “the race.” In these chapters I argue that Dunbar and Chesnutt resituated folklore in ways that extended beyond simply transposing historically identifiable items of folklore into their literary works. Both authors understood that through their literary engagements with folklore, they were entering deeply contested terrain. Writing at a moment when questions of racial identity and civil and political rights were increasingly played out through representations of black folk and folklore in popular culture, then naturalized through scientific discourses and practices, and finally institutionalized through legal decisions and legislation, Dunbar and Chesnutt introduced new literary strategies for contesting these various discourses as they struggled to find innovative ways to engage African American folklore, to critique the limits of popular representations of African Americans, and to enact New Negro social justice and uplift agendas. More specifically, Dunbar, like the Hampton folklorists, had to negotiate the politics of being objectified as an embodiment of African American folklore and/or the folk communities he chose to represent. In his literary works, masking and dissimulation became his vehicles for exposing the many intertwined literary and cultural conventions that determined the range of black representation. In his 1902 novel The Sport of the Gods, he critiques idealized notions of folklore through the texts depiction of tensions within the Southern folk community. He further challenges the construction of folklore as a Southern, rural phenomenon by introducing a new geographic terrain—the urban North—in which to imagine black folklore, thereby introducing into African American literature alternative geographies for African American Introduction  17 folklore, and thus providing one of the greatest affronts to the solidifying Jim Crow system: black folks who refused to remain in the segregated South. Chapter five details how Chesnutt, from early in his career, experimented with African American folklore as a way to critique the existing epistemological approaches to understanding black culture and black history, and later turned his attention to exposing the white-supremacist forms of folklore that worked to reinforce existing structures of race relations. In his 1901 essay “Superstitions and Folk-lore of the South,” Chesnutt assumes the positions of collector and translator as well as insider and outsider, with respect to black folk traditions. In this essay, he evokes “voice” as a trope for negotiating the shifting, yet circumscribed subject positions while simultaneously advancing his critique of dominant cultural representations of black folklore. In The Conjure Woman, his 1899 collection of short stories, Chesnutt incorporated the principles of conjure and ritual as formal strategies that allowed him to move beyond simply critiquing the conventions of the Plantation Tradition or even inverting the racial hierarchies steeped in the contemporary discourses of civilization, but instead to positing black folklore as an alternative way of constructing, perceiving, and responding to his current and historical realities. I close the chapter with an examination of Chesnutts The Colonels Dream (1905), a novel that painstakingly unravels the conflicting fictions of folklore and race by exposing the customary politics of race relations and the folklore that defines his white characters attitudes about race, African Americans, and themselves. In this remarkable shift, Chesnutt turns the ethnographic gaze on the white characters, exposing the constructions of white racial perceptions and revealing the epistemological frames that were often employed to construct so-called knowledge about African Americans. In concluding this project, I make an implicit call for a more nuanced genealogy of representations of black folklore from the post-Reconstruction era to what are typically considered the more “sophisticated” treatments of folklore in later African American literary and ethnographic works. In making this gesture, I do not want to insinuate that post-Reconstruction works merely anticipate later, more nuanced treatments of black folklore, but instead to recommend a more dynamic genealogy in which recognizing the complexity of post-Reconstruction engagements can render a richer understanding of subsequent treatments as well. This approach beckons us to recover another layer in the sophisticated and nuanced ways folklore and African American literature have intersected, not just in the post-Reconstruction period, or even in the Harlem Renaissance period and beyond, but indeed from the very foundations of the African American literary tradition.
1 “By Custom and By Law” Folklore and the Birth of Jim Crow Those who supported the myth of “separate but equal” were quick to adopt the rhetoric of folklore for support and protection. The notion that the social differences that were supposedly “created” by race could not be nullified by laws can be summed up in the famous adage often attributed to William Graham Sumner: “Stateways cannot change folkways.”1 This statement represents the proverbial soap that the country, particularly the Northern politicians and press, used to wash their hands of the segregation issue in the South. That American folklore studies grew up amid the fury over racial separation and difference is less a coincidence than a testament to the inextricability of folklore studies from the larger social, cultural, and political currents that defined the second half of the nineteenth century. At its founding, folklore studies was already invested in identifying and studying regional and ethnic groups—Negroes, Indians, bordering groups in Canada and Mexico—that existed within American borders and yet apart from mainstream American society. That these newly discovered “folk” possessed strange and peculiar habits observed and documented in this emerging field of study provided evidence that legislation could do little to change the habits and customs that defined race relations. 
Whether wittingly or not, when William Wells Newell co-founded the American Folklore Society (AFS) in the late 1880s, he entered into a national public discourse on the meaning and significance of folklore that was rife with implications for African American cultural representation and social, political, and civic life. By examining several of Newell’s statements on the emerging discipline of folklore, I argue that even though he sought to formalize a scientific and objective approach to folklore studies, there remained tensions and slippage between (and within) his scientific orientation toward folklore studies, competing theories of culture and race, and the place folklore occupied in the larger social, cultural, and political discourse. Despite Newell’s attempts to rein in this most unwieldy of concepts, “folklore” maintained its multiplicity. In considering the confluence of discourses that drew on folkloric rhetoric, specifically in the popular cultural discourses that coalesced around representations of folklore in the minstrel and Plantation Traditions and the political and legal rhetoric that drew a curious line of support from the folkloric rhetoric of “customs and traditions,” I seek to show how these intersecting discourses of folklore were variously deployed in constructing notions of race and nation in the late nineteenth century. In an 1890 article in the Nation, T. F. Crane announced, “The interest in folklore seems to be steadily increasing in this country.” He took as evidence of this growing interest “the large number of works on the subject . . . and the substantial support rendered to the American Folklore Society.” He went on to note, however, that the bulk of interest in folklore had adhered around “popular tales,” citing as a reason for their popularity their wide range of appeal to both “learned” and “unlearned” audiences and their adaptability in bolstering various theoretical interpretations.2 His contemporary, and the founder of the rival Chicago Folklore Society, Fletcher Bassett concurred, remarking that folklore had indeed become “the subject of the day.”3 As the nineteenth century drew to a close, folklore became increasingly present in U.S. social and cultural consciousness. Leading members of AFS held positions at top universities and came from a range of occupations and disciplines. Founding members included Francis James Child and George Lyman Kittredge from Harvard, American psychologist Stanley Hall, a host of early anthropologists such as Franz Boas and Frank Cushing, philanthropists including Isabel Hapgood and Mary Hemenway, as well as Thomas Wentworth Higginson and Oliver Wendell Holmes. Joel Chandler Harris, Mark Twain, and Lafcadio Hearn, all members of AFS, rooted their literary writings in folkloric materials, and Harris’s Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings (1880) was a major catalyst in promoting the study of African American folklore.4 Despite its growing presence in American public discourse, however, the meaning of folklore in the mid- to late nineteenth century, as suggested  by Crane’s remarks on the reasons for folklore’s wide appeal, was still very much in flux (as it remains today). Even as folklore studies became institutionalized in the United States through the work of AFS, Newell’s repeated and urgent attempts to define and delimit the society’s subject and its practice attest to the popularity, and mutability, of the concept of folklore. Indeed, Newell believed the AFS mission was under constant assault by the hordes of amateur collectors who were unable to achieve the requisite objectivity, due 20 Folklore and the Birth of Jim Crow either to their fervor for documenting and celebrating their local folklore or ideological biases that colored how they presented the materials they had collected. To counter these tendencies, Newell sought to dissuade his fellow folklorists from engaging in what he saw as theoretical debates that would bias the objective collection and study of folkloric materials. More specifically, he did not wish to see folklore studies enlisted in support of what he considered discredited theories tying folklore and culture to racial or biological determinism. Instead, he repeatedly promoted theories of diffusion, arguing that folklore was not traceable to racial or national origins, but was transmitted through the diffusion of materials via the interaction of different cultures. Finally, for Newell, the underlying principle and major contribution of folklore studies was as a historical science, a project carried out in the interest of reconstructing history. As for the folkloric materials collected, their significance was as remnants of the past surviving in the present and used to interpret and illuminate the past. In other words, folklore comprised the historical record that could show how materials (songs, tales, customs) were diffused, circulated and adapted among cultures. In the discussion that follows, I show how Newell’s methodological, theoretical, and historicallybased orientations toward folklore exerted and reflected a powerful, though not uncontested, force in influencing late-nineteenth-century approaches to the study of folklore and culture. In defining the parameters of American folklore studies, William Wells Newell was an especially significant figure. As co-founder and secretary of AFS and editor of the Journal of American Folklore (JAF), he exerted important influence over shaping the society’s project and determining how folklore would come to be institutionalized in the United States. In articulating his agenda for the 235 members of his organization, Newell stressed the scientific nature of the AFS endeavor, and prioritized the need for the “objective” and extensive collection of folkloric materials. In an 1890 report on the first annual meeting of AFS, Newell used the term “collection” a dozen times in sixteen pages, noting that folklore gave a scientific basis to the “study of popular traditions” and provided for the “additional collection” of materials which the editor of JAF felt was “necessary to elucidate many problems of anthropology.”5 In his opening statement for AFS, Newell identified the “principal objective” of the society as establishing a “Journal, of a scientific character, designed (i) For the collection of the fast-vanishing remains of Folk-Lore in America.”6 Newell’s almost obsessive emphasis on the scientific nature of folklore studies allowed him to validate his undertaking in relation to the professionalization of intellectual pursuits taking place at the end of the nineteenth century. As Simon Bronner points out, “the formation of folklore societies was part of a larger trend” in which over 200 learned societies were formed throughout the 1870s and 1880s.7 These societies, Bronner notes, sought to distinguish themselves by establishing their scientific and intellectual authority in illuminating and building a systematic body of knowledge. To establish folklore studies within this milieu, Newell had to set his work apart from the “popular” collections that were not documented rigorously and whose resulting representations of folklore, he believed, were colored by the perspective of the collector and creative or political influences. To counteract this popular plundering of folklore material, Newell emphasized dutiful collection and faithful transcription of folkloric materials. If folklore was going to contribute anything to current debates on the nature and flow of cultural traditions, Newell insisted, “they cannot possibly be published in popular forms.”8 According to Newell, these popular forms did not preserve the integrity of the materials collected and so made them useless in charting the distinct history of traditions as they existed in popular oral culture. According to Jon Cruz, in the post–Civil War years there was a shift in the interpretation of folklore—particular black spirituals—from the popular, romantic, “meaning-oriented” or “cultural” interpretations of the abolitionist period to the objectivist-oriented, taxonomical or “scientific” interpretations of the 1880s and 1890s. Whereas the abolitionists came to interpret folklore, and specifically the spiritual, through an avowedly cultural and political lens, as “cultural weaponry in the symbolic arsenal against slavery,” this approach, Cruz argues, was eclipsed, displaced, and superseded by folklorists and social scientists: “. . . the interpretive tone changed from a concern with what was ostensibly moral and political to a preoccupation with what could best be grasped descriptively, taxonomically, and analytically within the larger intellectual schemas of objectification and classification.”9 Working within this context, Newell sought to move away from the previous popular, romantic interpretations of folklore and instead stressed an “objectivist-oriented” rather than “meaning-oriented” approach to folklore collection that was more interested in amassing and studying folkloric material and how these texts circulated, than in understanding what the materials might have meant to the people and groups who shared and passed on these traditions. Hence, in the interest of scientific objectivity, Newell urged his fellow folklorists to avoid theoretical discussions of the materials that recapitulated the romantic nationalism, and hence the biological and racial determinism, he identified with popular approaches to folklore. In an 1890 essay, “Additional Collection Essential to Correct Theory in Folk-lore and Mythology,” Newell went to work discrediting each of the prevailing models of interpreting folklore. In countering theories that supported folklore as a product of racial or national inheritance, Newell noted, “this theory . . . received a rude shock by the recent demonstrations that differences of race and language are not necessarily an indication of differences in tradition.” As an example he cited the Basque people of Spain, who he maintained “do not seem to have retained any characteristic tales or songs which may be supposed derived from their ancient stock, but rather to have assimilated the lore of modern Europe.”10 Elsewhere, in a number of articles and books, he built a case against the Aryan origins theory, a version of the inheritance model, by arguing that Arthurian legends were products of French romanticism and not of Celtic folk origins. For Newell, the romantic nationalist approach to folklore was exemplified in the early-nineteenth-century folklore projects of Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm. In Newell’s estimation, the Grimms, who did not maintain a strict adherence to accurate transcription of oral tradition and who adapted folklore to popular forms, believed folklore was “a racial heritage, transmitted from remote prehistoric epochs. . . . The traditions of any folk were regarded as truly expressive of its own distinct national genius, its peculiar way of assimilating nature and life.” But this view, Newell asserted, was the result of “warm patriotism” and the desire to construct a unified Germany with a tradition every bit as poetic as the mythologies of ancient Greece.11 In each case, Newell sought to show that the search for national or racial origins was driven by political and ideological motives rather than by a scientific adherence to close and careful collection and analysis. Instead, he emphasized that the creation and transmission of folklore was the result of a complex process of diffusion that took place through the interaction between and among different cultural groups. This approach, at least in theory, allowed Newell to counter the evolutionary origins model, which suggested groups moved linearly through stages of evolution based on their mental and biological inheritances, and that their advancement was evidenced in their cultural or technological productions. Newell’s attention to the diffusion, rather than the evolution, of cultural material has been celebrated as his, as well as Boas’s, great contribution to the study of culture. In Before Cultures, for example, Brad Evans argues that this early attention—especially as articulated by Franz Boas—to the ability of culture to circulate was meant to undermine the notion of racial inheritance and make cross-cultural affiliation, rather than race, the basis of identification.12 While Newell’s promotion of diffusion over evolution certainly posed a challenge to the prevalent biological determinism and racial essentialism of the late nineteenth century, the implication of this theoretical orientation supported an assimilationist approach to culture, suggesting the ease with which blacks and other non-European or marginal groups could assimilate to the more civilized white Western culture. Furthermore, despite his attempts to discount evolution as an inadequate model for studying the circulation and transmission of folklore, Newell’s understanding of cultural groups was still rendered through an evolutionary schema that located groups at various stages of savagery, barbarism, semi-civilization, and civilization; in each case, white, Western culture being synonymous with civilization. In addressing reports of Voodoo worship in Haiti, for instance, Newell took pains to show that the reports likely were overblown products of popular imagination and stereotype. He sought to trace the origins of Voodoo, not to African practices and customs, but to medieval European practices brought to Louisiana and Haiti by the French. As Newell stated, “I shall be able to make it appear: first, that the name Vaudoux, or Voodoo, is derived from a European source; secondly, that the beliefs which the word denotes are equally imported from Europe; thirdly, that the alleged sect and its supposed rites have, in all probability, no real existence, but are a product of popular imagination.” In working toward these ends, Newell linked the practices associated with Voodoo more closely to medieval European witchcraft than to what he identified as the present-day savage customs of African cannibalism. Newell supported his contention through etymology and the collection and comparative analysis of reports regarding vaudoux and witchcraft, and concluded that the “Voodoos of Hayti are identical with the devout Waldenses of Piedmont.”13 While Newell was unsparing in his critiques of folklorists who allowed their interpretations to be colored by their personal, political, or ideological biases, Newell’s arguments in favor of European origins for African American folklore were not unaffected by such biases. Newell believed that blacks were assimilating so rapidly to white American practices that African American customs and tales actually bore the mark of the European remnants that persisted in white American culture rather than in African traditions and practices. This contention was supported by his belief that “in almost all cases folk-thought and folk-practice are imposed by the cultured races on the more barbarous, and that very little passes from the savage to the civilized.” He continued, “I doubt whether a single instance can be cited of the adoption and assimilation, by a highly cultivated race, of any considerable body of barbarous ideas. Where two races are mixed together, as in America negroes and whites, the case is more complicated; yet here, also, the influence of the civilized part of the community is immeasurably in excess.”14 Within the context of the larger U.S. racial discourse, theories of diffusion, along with the geographic and environmental explanation for cultural similarities and differences, meant that African Americans could assimilate (and indeed had done so) to the more civilized practices and traditions of white Americans. As Cruz points out, this belief in assimilation grew out of the humanitarian reformists’ views of the previous generation, but the new social scientists interpreted this cultural metamorphosis not through the moral and political lens of the abolitionists, but through a scientistic hermeneutic emphasizing classification and categorization.15 In other words, the argument for circulation of cultural materials and the assimilation of racial groups was posed in an earlier guise, as the abolitionists and then reformists argued first for blacks’ inherent humanity and second for blacks’ ability to be educated and elevated to civilized standards. These ideas formed the intellectual tradition that Newell drew on to counter the biological determinism rooted in notions of essential, inheritable, and biologically determined racial differences. While the scientific impulse characterized in Newell’s interpretative frame was legitimized within a rubric of objectivism, as Cruz contends, these orientations—the abolitionist/reformist and the scientific—“were never mutually exclusive” and indeed, “the benevolent attitude could blend with the managerial attitude to limit the value of cultural expressivity within larger structures of subjugation.”16 Furthermore, as John Roberts has argued extensively, the “discourse of folkness” that characterized nineteenth-century conceptions of folklore and interpretations of difference viewed Europeans as “the original folk and all other folk [as] mere imitators.” This orientation greatly truncated interpretations of African American vernacular creativity. Furthermore, as Roberts maintains, from its very inception “American folkloristics obscured the most important source of difference claimed by African Americans—an African cultural heritage . . . [and] in a general sense, the history of African American folklore study can be characterized as an extended and extensive discourse designed to deny African American difference as a viable and vital sign of African cultural presence in the United States.”17 In conjunction with his scientific orientation toward folklore studies and his commitment to theories of diffusion, Newell’s historically based hermeneutic focused on folklore as a remnant or survival of the past. Working within a past-oriented paradigm, Newell often fell back on a “stages of culture” framework rendered in terms of savagery, barbarism, semi-civilization, and civilization. For instance, in his 1888 founding statement for AFS, Newell identified ethnic and regional groups warranting immediate study by the society’s members. Although Newell conceded that in “the habits and ideas of primitive races much seems cruel and immoral to us,” he emphasized the necessity of dutifully recording these habits and ideas, for in them, he argued, modern civilization was furnished with “a complete representation of the savage mind.”18 Since Native Americans were being exterminated at the hands of American progress, Newell included the “Lore of the Indian Tribes of North America” on his list, and urged his fellow AFS members to “preserve memorials” of their way of life.19 Still set within the framework of rendering the savage mind accessible to the civilized, Newell identified the “Lore of the Negroes of the Southern States of the Union” as another pressing scholarly endeavor. Negro lore, he explained, represented “interesting and important psychological problems” for study by the learned society.20 Ostensibly, Newell rejected the idea of using folklore as evidence of cultural evolution on the basis that folklore was not just a survival from a savage stage. Instead, he maintained, “folklore is found to exist among the most intelligent as well as among the rudest part of the population.”21 As such, he included on his list, alongside the Native American and African American lore, “the relics of Old English Folk-Lore . . . [and] Lore of French Canada, Mexico, etc.”22 As Roberts points out, however, Newell’s shift from discussing the “lore” of Native Americans and African Americans to collecting the “relics” of the earlier stages of English folklore “made clear [Newell’s] view that British descendants represented a contemporary and enlightened element in American society. . . . Their possession of relics made them not folk, but passive bearers of tradition.”23 Indeed, the evolutionary schema hinted at in Newell’s subtle shift in terminology, along with larger social interest and intent, made impossible the separation of folklore studies from theories of social Darwinism. Scholarly and public interest in folkloric materials hinged, in part, on what these materials revealed about the evolutionary stages of human development. In the report on the third annual meeting of AFS, for instance, Newell explained that systems of knowledge could be partitioned into three categories, noting that even among the “lowest” or “most savage people” there had been “attempts at such understanding,” asserting that in general, a peoples’ “system of explanation” could be correlated with these stages of development, consisting of “savagery,” “barbarism,” and “civilization.” The folklore that existed among the “lowest people” provided a window into the “savage” or primitive mind, while the folklore that existed among the civilized provided a record of how the civilized had evolved to their current state.24 For many, folklore studies offered a way to mark, categorize, and order the allegedly uncivilized elements that persisted in a civilized society. Lee J. Vance, for instance, stated that “folklore is only concerned with the legends, customs, beliefs of the Folk, of the classes of people which have least been altered by education, which have shared least in progress . . . this folklore represents, in the midst of a civilized race, the savage ideas out of which civilization has been evolved.”25 In his report on the third annual meeting of AFS, Newell noted that Otis Mason (who became president of the society in 1891) “remarked [that] . . . when all the world was looking forward, it was a relief . . . glancing backward, and considering the past as it appeared by its survivals in the present. The record of the past formed an essential element in the interpretation of the future.”26 Daniel Brinton, the second president of the American Folklore Society, similarly reasserted the association between folklore and the study of “survivals” or relics. And while Brinton, like Newell, claimed not to subscribe to the theories of social Darwinism or cultural evolution, he classified cultures in terms of stages of development, from savagery, to barbarism, semi-civilization, civilization, and finally to enlightenment, with folklore representing the remnants of the earlier stages of development that persisted, however fleetingly, in the face of progress and advancement.27 Like its American counterpart, European folklore studies, which had seen the formation of the British Folk-Lore Society in 1878, was just as firmly rooted in the concept of folklore as “survivals.” Several of the British society’s early presidents insisted that folklore comprised “survivals” from an earlier stage of development and identified groups in which folklore persisted.28 In organizing the American Folklore Society, Newell borrowed organizational principles and theoretical approaches from European folklore studies, maintaining the European emphasis on collecting “survivals” or “relics.” Nevertheless, Newell sought to distinguish American folklore studies from its European predecessors by finding uniquely American materials to collect. While theoretically consistent with European models, particularly in relation to the emphasis on “survivals,” Newell’s contribution, Rosemary Zumwalt insists, was to create a more inclusive and pluralist approach to American folklore studies. As Zumwalt explains, within a European framework the folk were seen as the peasant ancestors to the civilized members of modern society; thus, prior to the formation of AFS, “the American Indian as ‘savage’” would not have been recognized as “folk” and as such “would be studied by the ethnologist and not by the folklorist.”29 Similarly, Roger Abrahams argues that Newell, in his more inclusive approach to “American cultures worthy of study,” advocated a “radical vision” of American pluralism.30 While Newell may have found innovative ways to adapt European folklore studies to the American context, his identification of certain groups as “folk,” which he variously equates with savage and primitive, marked these groups as a less evolved other to the mainstream, “civilized,” white, Western norm. In an 1894 speech to the Hampton folklorists, for instance, Newell defines “folk” as synonymous with race, and “lore” as signifying the “learning or knowledge peculiar” to the race.31 He maintains that folklore belongs to the primitive stage and as races move through the stages of culture en route to civilization, folklore provides a record of their evolution. As the “Negro” accepts more “advanced ideas, habits, morals and theology,” Newell explains, he will take his place among the civilized human race and his folklore will provide a record of the stages through which he has passed.32 In considering his own racial identity, Newell notes that although he is of English ancestry, he truly can claim no racial affiliation other than that of the “human race.”33 Newell’s comments suggest that concepts such as the “human race” were defined by his naturalized worldview and an assumption that white Western middle-class values equaled a universal, unquestioned norm. His notion that African Americans would eventually shed their distinctive folklore and move toward becoming merely part of the “human race” indicates that folklore was something that could mark racial difference and inferiority, but with proper training and education, one could shed these vestiges of savagery and enter the civilized domain. In linking folk to nonAnglo-American “races,” and in identifying African Americans and Native Americans as folk—but himself as non-folk—Newell renders folklore within a racialized evolutionary power structure in which he and his cohort occupy the position of universal evolved/civilized authority, while the racialized others maintain lower positions on the evolutionary scale until they are able to shed their racially distinct (read: non-white) folklore and become “universal” (read: white). Finally, despite his admonitions against “romantic nationalism” and his promotion of a rigid scientism, Newell’s orientation toward folklore nevertheless was influenced by the anti-modern romanticism of the period. On one hand, as Bronner suggests, the swell of attention to the study of folklore was part of the trend of meeting the problems facing late-nineteenth-century America “in the safety of a distant past or removed place, rather than in the anxiety-ridden present.”34 As Bronner argues, industrial advances and improvements in transportation and communication had quickened the tempo of daily life and increased the quantity of goods and services. These advances also created the middle-class perception that “there was an abundance of new goods ready for consumption and an abundance of culture ready for collecting.”35 On the other hand, what Bronner identifies as an American tendency to confront the modern problems of the rapidly changing present in the safety of a timeless past can be read more specifically as the tendency to meet the problems of the post-Reconstruction racial crisis in the safety of the antebellum past. Through his past-oriented, survivals approach to folklore, Newell romanticized the folklore of others—particularly Native and African Americans—as more vital elements in the face of progress and modernity. He warned his fellow folklorists that their “encomiums on national prosperity” would not make amends for their lack of attention to what he referred to as their “obligation” to study the primitive culture of Native and African Americans.36 In terms of African Americans specifically, Newell identified folklore as the survivals or remnants of slave culture, and his location of folklore in the slave past was reflected in Plantation Tradition ideology that located black folklore within a mythic Southern past. Plantation Tradition literature emerged first in the 1830s but gained increased popularity in the 1880s and 1890s with the writings of Harris and Thomas Nelson Page. Works in the Plantation Tradition tended to romanticize the antebellum South as a simpler time and place, creating an idealized past valorizing white Southern patriarchy and supporting the notions that blacks had been happy and faithful under the master/slave system and that authority for addressing the “Negro problem” should once again be entrusted to Southern whites. This elaborate fiction allowed Northern whites to avoid the contemporary crisis precipitated by the social and political presence of free blacks by returning responsibility for the “Negro problem” back to the supposedly benevolent rulers of the former slaveocracy. Newell’s attention to collecting the survivals of slave life as it had existed on the Southern plantation intersected with the era’s preoccupation with African Americans who could be removed temporally and geographically from the current moment and located instead in the timeless imaginary of the antebellum South. To be sure, Newell’s inclusion of the folklore of “Negroes of the Southern States of the Union” can be read as part of a pluralist agenda, and his attention to plantation folklore as a means of documenting the progress of educated African Americans can be seen as a progressive attempt to show that blacks were able to “evolve” by adopting the cultural practices and norms of dominant white society. Nevertheless, his identification of plantation folklore as that which was authentic about African American identity reified the prevailing Plantation Tradition ethos. Alongside the growing popularity of Plantation Tradition literature, throughout the greater part of the nineteenth century, minstrelsy similarly spurred attention to black folklore, stoking debates about whether African Americans were capable of inventiveness and originality in their cultural productions or whether they merely imitated and “aped” white cultural forms. Simply stated, blackface minstrelsy refers to the pervasive popular cultural phenomenon in which white actors from about the 1830s onward darkened their faces and took to the stage performing parodies of black folklore and traditions. In the history of folklore studies, and of constructions of blackness in the United States generally, the significance of the minstrel tradition cannot be overstated. By the time the American Folklore Society was founded, the minstrel tradition had already constructed representations of African Americans as a distinct and peculiar folk group, replete with laughable habits, strange customs, and raucous songs and dance. With its conspicuous treatment and haphazard manipulation of black folk culture, coupled with the eventual use of black performers as the conduits of the material, minstrelsy marked black behavior as a subject for folkloric collection. As a prerequisite to understanding the conflation between the formation of folklore studies, the discourse of folklore, and the legalization of racial segregation at the end of the century, it is necessary first to consider briefly the ways in which minstrelsy shaped the national consciousness about race, particularly as this discourse centered on representations of black folklore as an indication of racial difference. line > As a folk character made famous by the white minstrel performer Thomas Rice, Jim Crow ushered in a period of blackface performance that thrust the black image into the national and local entertainment spotlight. Rice’s depiction of blackness quickened a cultural fascination with the black image that culminated in the immense popularity of minstrelsy. This juggling of racial identity eventually elicited enough attention to become a site of appropriation for the forming system of Jim Crow segregation. Tracing the career of Jim Crow reveals how popular culture, folklore studies, constructions of the black folk, and social and political agendas all converged around turn-of-thecentury questions of racial identity and social order. The birth of Jim Crow, the stage character, has typically been traced to an 1828 blackface performance by Thomas Dartmouth “Daddy” Rice. Rice, a white actor from New York’s Seventh Ward on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, supposedly began “jumping Jim Crow” after a legendary encounter with Jim, the black stable hand. In On the Real Side, a study of humor in black entertainment, Mel Watkins recounts the event: Rice . . . reportedly saw a crippled and deformed black hostler or stable groom singing and performing a striking but peculiar dance as he went about his work. The actor, recognizing the potential appeal of the song—“Weel about and turn about, and do jis so. / Eb’ry time I weel about I jump Jim Crow”—and the black man’s twisted, antic movements, memorized the lyrics and copied the dance.37 As the widely accepted story goes, Rice added several verses to the song, which he started performing between acts of The Rifle, and according to the legend, even bought the old man’s clothes to “assure” the authenticity of his performance.38 While the veracity of the encounter remains questionable, the legend has been continually reproduced because it provides a convenient explanation for the threatening appearance of ostensibly black folk material on the local and national stage. However, recent scholarship, as championed by W. T. Lhamon, asserts that this encounter was a fabrication of contemporary white journalists and middle-class monthly magazines contemptuous of the popularity of blackface performance and anxious about poor whites adopting black cultural material as an expression of dissatisfaction with their own stations in life. Instead, Lhamon’s study shows Rice moved in culturally amalgamated circles and traveled extensively from New York’s Five Points to Cincinnati, Mobile, Pensacola, Washington, Philadelphia, and New Orleans, arguing that it was during these travels and over the course of several years that Rice figured out how to adapt Jim Crow for the stage.39 According to Lhamon, Jim Crow was “hardly a sudden or whimsical event” but instead was rooted in working-class affiliations across color lines and a lower-class desire to harness the subversive energy surging in black folk culture.40 Bringing his impersonations of black folk life to the stage, Rice became one of America’s best-known comedians, riding the wave of American popular culture’s fascination with blackness. But what of this popular culture fetish for ostensibly black folk material? Representing one end of the spectrum, Lhamon argues that this white fascination with black folk culture boiled up from poor whites’ identification with the “charisma” that blacks exhibited in the face of oppression and servitude. Lhamon contends that it was the “liberating potential” of Rice’s Jim Crow character that made it so wildly popular with poor white audiences on one hand and a ready target for racist appropriation by middle-class and elite authorities on the other.41 Robert Tolls asserts, to the contrary, that as slavery grew into a national controversy and free blacks became increasingly present in the public sphere, minstrelsy served to satisfy Northern whites’ curiosities about blacks, while it also organized the growing black presence into convenient stereotypes. Whether Jim Crow was first adopted by white actors for its cross-racial energy and liberating effects and later warped into a tool for segregationists’ agendas, as Lhamon asserts, or blackface performance was always operating on the basis of demeaning stereotypes, as Tolls contends, one thing is certain: early blackface performances played an integral role in forming the popular perceptions of the black folk. Rice’s white contemporaries, for example, did not see him as an originator at all but lauded him as one skilled at impersonating the gestures and language of the black folk. A London reviewer explained, “We will not say that we like Mr. Rice’s performance, but there cannot be a doubt of its extraordinary reality. The shuffling gait, the strange whistle, and the more strange laugh.”42 Rice’s manager Noah Ludlow claimed that his client’s talent lay in “imitating the broad and prominent peculiarities of other persons, as was evident in his close delineations of the corn-field Negro, drawn from real life.”43 Rice’s contemporaries regarded him not only as a performer of black folk material, but also as an ethnographer, translator, and representative of authentic Negro life. Early blackface actors were seen as purveyors, or in their own terminology, “delineators,” of black folk culture, and thus these white actors took control of presenting American popular culture with its images of black folk life. Tolls, however, contends that these “blackface minstrels were not authentic, even in intention. They were not ethnographers, but professional entertainers, whose major concern was to create stage acts that would please their audiences.”44 Thus, until the late 1860s and early 1870s, the major “black presence” in American popular culture was not black at all, but instead reflected white impersonations of black life. While elite sensibilities may have been offended by Jim Crow’s disregard for social decorum and racial categorization, ultimately this stage character’s strange behaviors and bizarre habits helped solidify a sense of social and civil superiority that justified the white elites’ claims to a position farther along on the evolutionary scale. By 1840, any liberating and subversive potential that the early Jim Crow performances may have suggested had given way to the form of blackface minstrelsy, producing the damaging stereotypes that openly caricatured and ridiculed black life. Even Lhamon concedes that by the early 1840s, the form of blackface minstrelsy that followed Rice’s Jim Crow performances inverted Rice’s connections to blackness and made them “abhorrent.”45 By the mid-1800s, minstrel performances used this “humor” to penetrate a national consciousness and shape an ideology of racial difference and degradation. What white audiences found most comical in the white minstrel performances of black life were the grotesque physical features attributed to blacks and the primitive, childish behaviors parodied for comic value, as the following description of the Virginia Minstrels’ performance makes clear: They burst on stage in makeup which gave the impression of huge eyes and gaping mouths. They dressed in ill-fitting, patchwork clothes and spoke in heavy nigger dialects. Once on stage, they could not stay still for an instant. Even while sitting, they contorted their bodies, cocked their heads, rolled their eyes, and twisted their outstretched legs . . . their wild hollering and their bobbing, seemingly compulsive movements charged the entire performance with excitement.46 Coupled with this visual spectacle of black behavior, minstrel shows also satirized the popular social and political issues of the day. Minstrels in blackface would turn the topics of Emancipation, suffrage, and education into comic routines, at once undermining the seriousness of the issue being satirized while also insinuating blacks’ inability to participate in serious political discussion. Minstrel shows were interspersed with pithy exchanges between actors, dialect-infused speeches, and boisterous song and dance. Many shows ended in “plantation extravaganzas,” in which the plantation was presented as idyllic and blacks as contented and servile. These representations promoted pro-slavery and later pro-segregation interests and instilled the stereotypes of blacks as childlike, carefree, and in need of protection. These shows also portrayed blacks as vastly different from whites, more different perhaps, than even Northern whites had imagined. Blackface minstrelsy remained wildly popular with white audiences up to and through the Civil War. Its representation of black folk life reflected and solidified public opinion. At best, it showed blacks as natural, primitive, and carefree juxtaposed to evolved, modern, and civilized society. At worst, it branded blacks as immoral, stupid, lazy, and inferior. Watkins aptly states, “by focusing on and exaggerating the supposed earthy peculiarities of blacks, black-faced mimics provided the simple, folksy entertainment that white audiences demanded and assured them that, indeed, they were superior to their enslaved brethren.”47 After the Civil War, in the Reconstruction and post-Reconstruction eras, minstrel caricatures and stereotypes passed from white performers in blackface to black performers. By and large, whites controlled the management and profit of black minstrel troupes, and blackface minstrelsy had set the parameters of minstrel performance decades earlier.48 When black performers inherited the stage from white people in blackface, they found themselves trapped within the confines of caricature and rewarded for their ability to personify the stereotypes conjured up by white minstrel performances. In the post-Reconstruction era, seeing whites act like blacks was no longer quite as funny as it was to see blacks act like whites expected them to act. When black minstrels went before their white audiences, they provided the corporeal evidence that blacks were, at best, different and peculiar and, at worst, grotesque and degenerate. Here was physical proof that blacks were an anomaly to be exploited in popular entertainment and a curiosity to be investigated in the emerging social sciences. Promoters and reviewers emphasized that these were not shows involving entertainers or performers, but displays of natural, uninhibited black life. Black minstrel troupes were promoted as “the real thing,” “real nigs,” and “genuine plantation darkies.”49 Black performers were able to modify these stereotypes by adding detail, nuance, and more significantly, by creating in-group meanings among themselves and their black audiences. The stereotypes and caricatures forged by the white minstrels were too deeply ingrained and culturally useful, however, for the white audiences to discard. Therefore the black minstrels found that, far from creating satirical critiques, their performances reinforced the racial stereotypes, adding physical evidence that verified the white audience’s expectations. The print for Oliver Scott’s “Refined Negro Minstrels” (see Fig. 1.3) depicts the medley of stereotypes that had come to dominate the minstrel shows and capture the public imagination. Jim Crow, Zip Coon, and the enduring and infamous Grinning Darkie of the old plantation South ousted the Yankee and the backwoodsman from national prominence. In the Scott print, the dandy poses in a flashy yellow coat, sporting pencil-thin legs and holding a cane. A Topsy-like character dances around a figure whose spectacles mark him as a caricature of the black intellectual. In the background, standing erect, are five “gentlemen” who could be a spoof on the Hampton Student Singers or Fisk Jubilee Singers, groups known for their dignified manner and impeccable dress. In front of the student singers is the ever-popular parody of the cakewalk couple: an ornately dressed Southern belle towering over her stocky, diminutive companion. In the foreground, a mammy figure and a variation of the Jim Crow character dominate. The Scott print illustrates aptly how representations of black folklore—the “songs and dancing” promised in the print caption—and the different possibilities for black identity and representation, were mocked and curtailed through the evocation of easy and convenient stereotypes. The black intellectual, the Northern gentleman, the Southern rural folks, as well as the sophisticates, were all turned into comic relief on the minstrel stage. It was also protocol for black minstrels to legitimize themselves by playing on the audience’s desire to see real, authentic blacks. To stress that they were genuine Negroes, most black minstrels ceased darkening their faces with burnt cork. The variety of hues among the actual black faces was another authenticating feature that allowed the black minstrels to claim that they were not “uniformly painted imitations” like their white minstrel predecessors, and critics even began to denounce white minstrels as “base imitators” of the real thing.50 The cultural obsession with the “natural” and “spontaneous” behavior of these black figures continued to grow, climaxing in 1895 with the arrival of a “Negro Village” in Brooklyn’s Ambrose Park. As Tolls explains, the plantation literally came to New York. The minstrel show “Black America” created a plantation fantasy in the midst of the city, complete with Negro cabins, hen yards, chickens, mules, and peopled with 500 blacks identified as “genuinely southern Negroes . . . brought direct from the fields.” The show was billed as an “ethnological exhibit of unique interest,” and blacks were referred to not as entertainers, but as participants. The show promised “no imitation, nothing but what is real.” The Negro Village, as one viewer commented, “might have been hundreds of miles from civilization.”5 Just two years before the Negro Village captivated audiences with images of “genuine plantation Negroes,” the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago had enthralled fairgoers with its architectural masterpiece, the White City. The White City, ostensibly named for the white paint that covered every building within the exhibit, showcased the accoutrements of modern civilization. The Court of Honor stood at the center of the city, surrounded by the marvels of modern civilization. Enormous white buildings ran along the canals surrounding the Court of Honor and housed exhibits of modern industry, art, agriculture, and electricity. Women, after protesting their exclusion, received one building located on the edge of the White City. Blacks, however, were excluded from the White City altogether. In fact, non-white, non-Western participants were relegated to the Midway Plaisance. German and Irish exhibits were located near the entrance of the Midway, followed by Turkish, Arabic, and Chinese “villages.” Finally, the American Indians and Dahomans were situated at the end of the Midway.52 As the Chicago Tribune reported, “What an opportunity was here afforded to the scientific mind to descend the spiral of evolution tracing humanity in its highest phase down to its animalistic origins.”53 As Gail Bederman notes, just as whites “insisted tenaciously that civilization was built on white racial dominance, African Americans were equally tenacious in insisting that civilization was not necessarily white.”54 Frederick Douglass and Ida B. Wells vehemently objected to the exclusion of blacks from the exposition. In their protest pamphlet, The Reason Why the Colored American is Not in the World’s Columbian Exposition, they argued that the African American best demonstrated the advances of civilization, having overcome the hardships of slavery to survive and excel, while the white Americans’ exclusion of black Americans from the exposition only further illustrated that white America lacked the decency and civilization it professed.55 Anna Julia Cooper, too, denounced the exclusion of African Americans from the Fair, noting, “. . . foreigners from all parts of the globe, who shall attend our Columbian Exposition,” would come away with images of African American subjugation or exclusion. The barring of African Americans from any kind of substantive participation in the White City, she continued, said more about the lauded, but in her view illusory, “impartiality and generosity of our white countrymen” than it did about African Americans’ state of or contributions to civilization.56 Juxtaposing the White City to the Negro Village and the Midway Plaisance reveals by stark contrast the racialization of the discourses of folklore and civilization. These grand spectacles combined popular entertainment, representations of “authentic” folk, and scientific discourse to reinforce for the American public that white was synonymous with civilization and black with primitivity. It was the folklore of the Negro that provided a foil against which the modern, evolved, rational society could be measured. The Negro occupied a different place on the evolutionary ladder and was not figured as an ancestor to the civilized middle-class American, but instead was seen as a living example of the primitive stage. As the superimposition of the rhetoric of evolution onto the discourse of black folklore makes clear, the black folk were not just within, but apart from, American society; they were behind and below modern civilization. The ideology of social, cultural, and biological evolution coursed through the entire conversation, providing “scientific” justification that this was indeed the natural order of things. Throughout the nineteenth century, minstrelsy had an indelible impact on emerging social, cultural, and intellectual institutions. Minstrelsy furnished “the jokes that were told and retold, the songs that were on everyone’s lips, and the vivid, literally living . . . minstrels in effect evolved a kind of ‘national folklore’—a constellation of images, definitions, symbols and meaning that most white Americans could and did share.”57 By yoking the stage stereotypes to claims of a folk authentic, minstrelsy created a potent black folk image that intrigued the social scientist and provided ready support for the rapidly solidifying system of Jim Crow segregation. While minstrelsy provides an ideal trope for examining constructions of racial identity around representations of black folklore, the ostensibly racially based differences caricatured in Jim Crow minstrel performances also received literary treatment in works from the so-called Plantation and Lost Cause traditions. The Plantation Tradition, epitomized in the works of Joel Chandler Harris and Thomas Nelson Page, gained efficacy through the manipulation of black folklore so that it became an emblem of childish behaviors and “the good ole days before the war.”58 The images of happy, industrious, and loyal “darkies” and of kind and just plantation owners helped absolve Northern whites of a race issue that by century’s end had come to stand in the way of the profitable reconciliation many Northern and Southern whites now desired. Where the Plantation Tradition left off, literature of the Lost Cause picked up. Works in this tradition, exemplified by Thomas Dixon’s The Leopard’s Spots, provided a storehouse of the more damning stereotypes of blacks as lazy, thieving, and sexually voracious, while idealizing the pre–Civil War South and its lost culture.59 Alongside these popular-culture representations, early submissions of black folklore to JAF added an air of scientific authority and objectivity to the public’s beliefs about the black folk. Newell, editor of JAF from 1888–99, noted that since blacks, “for good or ill, [were] henceforth an indissoluble part of the body politic,” their lore warranted rigorous investigation.60 Accordingly, JAF published over 100 articles and notes on black folklore in its first twenty-five issues, and Newell assured the readers that, “in conformity with the spirit of modern scholarship,” the folklore materials presented were of “sufficient scientific status to make them worth recording.”61 From its founding days, however, JAF betrayed the tension that existed between Newell’s continual injunctions that the journal submissions focus solely on documenting folklore materials and the propensity of the contributors to theorize about the materials they presented. Thus, some of the contributions on black folklore are relatively straightforward and strive for a degree of objectivity. Stewart Culin in his “Reports Concerning Voodooism,” for example, notes, “it is popularly asserted in Hayti and San Domingo that the negroes perpetuate Voodoo orgies, and that cannibalism is still practiced.” Culin, to the contrary, states, “I believe that meetings are held, but do not think they are accompanied with human sacrifices.”62 He then provides a secondhand account of how Voodoo rites and rituals were used to secure a marriage, to bring harm to an enemy, and to cause a mysterious death. He imparts these accounts not as a way to pass judgment on the participants or practitioners, but instead to suggest the importance of belief and performance in the Voodoo ritual.63 Alcee Fortier’s “Customs and Superstitions of Louisiana,” in contrast, provided just the type of scholarly report that proved useful in depicting the black folk customs that sustained the plantation ideology and, by extension, Jim Crow segregation. Fortier begins his contribution to JAF ’s second issue by stating: In order to understand fully the customs of a past age and of plantation life before the war, we must bear in mind that the planters lived in the greatest opulence and possessed many slaves. These were, as a rule, well treated by their masters, and in spite of slavery, they were contented and happy. Not having any of the responsibilities of life, they were less serious than the present freemen and more inclined to take advantage of all opportunities to amuse themselves. Fortier goes on to explain that New Year’s Day on the plantations was an occasion of great merriment and pleasure for the slaves, when they would gather around the big house and receive “a piece of ox killed expressly for them, several pounds of flour, and a new tin pan and spoon.” Fortier further observes: “The scene was most striking, interesting and weird. Two or three hundred men and women were there in front of the house, wild with joy and most boisterous, although always respectful.” Recounting the celebration, Fortier notes that the slaves’ “strange and savage music . . . [and] grotesque and extraordinary faces” provided “great amusement” to the children, and although the tradition was “less entertaining” to the parents, “they never interfered, as they considered that, by well-established custom, New Year’s Day was one of mirth and pleasure for the childlike slaves.” Fortier concludes that the scene he has documented is “very different . . . from those described in ‘Uncle Tom’s Cabin,’ for the slaves were certainly not unhappy on the plantations.”64 Perhaps not incidentally, Fortier’s description of slave life sounds remarkably similar to what was a well-known 1878 Plantation Tradition poem by Irwin Russell, “Christmas-Night in the Quarters,” in which Russell describes the festivities of an antebellum Christmas celebration on a large plantation: “When merry Christmas-day is done, / And Christmas-night is just begun; /. . . The darkies hold high carnival. / From all the country-side they throng, / With laughter, shouts, and scraps of song.” Russell’s poem continues, explaining the source of the slaves’ unbridled enthusiasm: “Original in act and thought, / Because unlearned and untaught. / Observe them at their Christmas party: / How unrestrained their mirth—how hearty! / How many things they say and do / That never would occur to you!” Russell explains that the slaves are justified in their celebration because the next day they will return to the fields and resume their diligent service and hard work. In his poem, the slaves continually appeal to “Mahsr” to forgive and “bless” them, since they cannot restrain the inevitable call to dance.65 The similarities between Fortier’s folklore document and Russell’s Plantation Tradition poem suggest the close, at times intertwined, relationship between early folklore studies and mainstream popular culture, particularly black folklore and popular cultural materials associated with the minstrel and Plantation Traditions. In a journal purportedly devoted to the objective and scientific study of folklore, Newell saw fit to publish Fortier’s submission containing so many assumptions sustaining the post-Reconstruction segregationist platform. Was this an oversight, or were the ideas that Fortier advanced, linking representations of folklore to the politics of the Plantation Tradition, so pervasive that they were published, evidently uncontested, in a journal devoted to the scientific study of Negro folklore? In a society fraught with racial tensions, it would be difficult to overestimate the impact of the popular representations of the black folk, coupled with the intellectual and “scientific” assessments of black folklore, on turnof-the-century racial politics. The rhetoric of folklore achieved currency in the political and legal discourse of segregation because it was easily translated into support for the separation of the races and the inferior position of blacks. The combination of the minstrel and plantation images of black folklore, along with the scientific framework provided by the newly emerging field of folklore studies, supplied segregationists with a convenient apparatus for legitimizing a system of racial separation predicated on two premises: 1) racial distinctions could be demarcated, if not through one’s blood or physical appearance, then at least through the observation of what were ostensibly racially differentiated behaviors, practices, and characteristics, and 2) the separation of blacks and whites followed the existing customs, traditions, and habits of the people and therefore could not be regulated by law. Many cultural commentators, past and present, have observed that, given the reality of a racially “mixed” population, discerning racial identity came with a host of attendant difficulties. The judges and legislatures who constructed and supported the “one drop rule” recognized the difficulty of visually distinguishing race, realizing that racial identification had to move beyond physical markers. But if discerning race based on physical appearance was difficult, identifying the color of a person’s blood presented an obvious paradox.66 This dilemma required new indicators of racial identity, and those indicators were found, in part, through attention to what were ostensibly racially differentiated behaviors, i.e., folk customs. There was an insistence, for example, that blacks could not imitate whites, that the behavioral differences, if not inherent, were so ingrained that they had become “spontaneous” and “natural.” Dominant interpretations of black minstrelsy as inherent and authentic worked to legitimize segregationist agendas by supplying examples of the kinds of uncivilized behaviors that blacks supposedly exhibited as vastly different from those of civilized white society. At the same time, there was a growing consensus that legislation could do little to change the folkways, habits, social practices, and/or folk customs that inherently separated the races. In establishing a precedent for the Plessy decision, Justice Henry Billings Brown turned to Roberts v. City of Boston (1849), citing State Supreme Court Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw, who casually noted in his majority opinion upholding segregation in Massachusetts public schools that racial “prejudice, if it exists, is not created by law and probably cannot be changed by law.”67 As Rayford Logan has documented, this sentiment was echoed in the Northern press. The New Haven Evening Register, for example, voiced “grave doubt if the question of social principles can be settled satisfactorily by legislation,” and as Logan notes, like opinions were expressed in similar language in a number of major city newspapers. 68 Indeed, the very phrase “by custom and by law,” which was popularly used to describe how Jim Crow segregation was enacted, borrows from folklore studies the term used to denote both the traditional way of doing things (i.e., customary) and the things done in the traditional way (i.e., customs). In other words, the notion that racial separation and difference are accomplished “by custom” implies they are a result of the force of tradition, or in everyday parlance, just the way things are. It also implies, however, that racial distinction is evidenced in the “customs,” or characteristics and behaviors, distinguishing the two races. Justice Henry Billing Brown’s majority opinion in the Plessy case illustrates how the dual meaning operated. When Brown declared that it was legally permissible for the state of Louisiana to act in accordance with the “the established customs, traditions and usages of the people,” he was drawing on the first meaning of the term, allowing that the “reasonableness” of the statute was confirmed by its adherence to existing customs. When he later stated that “if one race be inferior to the other socially, the Constitution of the United States cannot be expected to put them on the same plane,” he was basing his constitutional interpretation on the second meaning of custom, implying that in the absence of the ability to rely on “admixture of blood” or even appearance, it was blacks’ inferior social behaviors that distinguished them from whites and relegated them to a separate sphere in the public and private life of the nation.69 This concept was articulated most overtly in the Mississippi Supreme Court Ratliff v. Beale (1896) case, in which the court deferred to the 1890 Mississippi State Constitution in supporting its decision upholding poll taxes. The court stated: By reason of its previous condition of servitude and dependence, this race had acquired or accentuated certain peculiarities of habit, of temperament, and character, which clearly distinguished it as a race from that of the whites—a patient, docile people, but careless, landless, and migratory within narrow limits, without forethought, and its criminal members given rather to furtive offense than to the robust crimes of white. Restrained by the Federal Constitution from discriminating against the Negro race, the [Mississippi State] Convention discriminated against its characteristics.70 In this decision, the justices found that the Mississippi State Constitution did not discriminate against blacks because of their race, but instead held that it was due to blacks’ inferior characteristics that they found themselves disenfranchised. In other words, the voting qualification of two years of consistent payment of the poll taxes was not meant to discriminate against blacks as a race but against the characteristics of carelessness, transiency, and criminality, to which blacks just happened to be prone. This mode of reasoning is characteristic of the form of “historicist racial rule” that, as David Theo Goldberg asserts, rose to dominance in the second half of the nineteenth century. Distinguishing between the “historicist” and “naturalist” forms of racial rule, Goldberg explains that in the “naturalist” paradigm, which dominated from the seventeenth century until well into the nineteenth century, black inferiority was rooted in or determined by African Americans’ biological makeup. In its ideology and operation the “naturalist’s” program tended to be “viscerally vicious,” “cruel,” and “direct concerning racist presumptions and commitments.”71 “Historicist rule,” on the other hand, employed a version of cultural evolutionism, arguing, according to Goldberg, that black inferiority was a product of culture and environment (i.e., “their previous condition of servitude”) and that “those not white are . . . developmentally immature, historically not yet capable of self-governance.”72 While there was certainly plenty of cross-fertilization between the historicist and naturalist modes of reasoning, and as Goldberg notes, the rise of historicist racial rule hardly displaced the naturalist forms of rule, the historicist mode allowed the state legislatures and the local, state, and federal courts to pass and uphold laws that could appear non-discriminatory on the surface and yet, in fact, be deeply discriminatory. Thus the Supreme Court, and state courts and legislatures, followed the scientific and social scientific discourse, popular culture, and vocal public opinion in favor of racial segregation in accepting as fact that racial distinctions existed as a matter of custom, while black inferiority was a consequence of blacks’ culture, environment, or biology, but certainly not of law. Conciliatory rhetoric notwithstanding, the Plessy decision, in effect, gave the federal stamp of approval to a state-by-state travesty already under way when the justices decided they could not sway social ideas or customs, thus authorizing the disenfranchisement of African Americans and condemning them to second-class citizenship for the next five-plus decades. It would be fifty-eight years before the Supreme Court would recognize the racism, prejudice, and discrimination buried in the ostensibly non-discriminatory rhetoric and reasoning of the Plessy decision. While the Supreme Court was slow to admit the discriminatory nature of its decision, there were those, like Charles Chesnutt, who understood clearly what pulsated beneath the Court’s ruling. In “The Negro and the Courts,” Chesnutt opined: The most important and far reaching decision of the Supreme Court upon the question of civil rights is that in the case of Plessy vs. Ferguson. . . . The opinion is a clear and definite approval of the recognition by State laws, of color distinction. . . . It establishes racial caste in the United States as firmly as though it were established by an act of Congress. . . . a more humiliating, insulting, and degrading system is hardly conceivable under even a nominally free government.73 Similarly, in an important but unheeded dissenting opinion, Justice John Harlan recognized that the federal institutions were authorizing a travesty, predicting, “It is, therefore, to be regretted that this high tribunal . . . has reached the conclusion that it is competent for a state to regulate the enjoyment by citizens of their civil rights solely upon the basis of race. . . . the thin disguise of ‘equal’ accommodations . . . will not mislead anyone, nor atone for the wrong this day done.”74 The confluence of forces that congealed around the formation of folklore studies in the late nineteenth century did not go unremarked upon by African American intellectuals and cultural workers. While Newell’s scientific hermeneutic and emphasis on diffusion allowed for an expansion in thinking about cultural formations that pushed beyond a strict adherence to biological or racial determinism, the political and cultural implications of his orientation toward folklore became areas of concern for several African American cultural commentators. African American folklorists and cultural workers, ranging from Anna Julia Cooper and Alexander Crumell, to W. E. B. Du Bois, Paul Laurence Dunbar, and Pauline Hopkins—all deeply aware of the racial politics of representing and studying black folklore—imagined alternative possibilities for African American folklore and folklore studies. Cooper, for instance, challenged the vaunted objectivity embraced by Newell. Instead, she advocated for a more intimate and reciprocal relationship between folklore and African American literature, embracing folklore’s role in creating an African American literary tradition, not so much as part of a racially essentialist project, but as conscious cultivation of an oppositional perspective and history embodied in black folklore. Hampton folklorist Robert Moton, on the other hand, participated in categorizing and classifying black folk songs but resisted examining folklore as detached remnants of the past, and instead advocated for an understanding of folklore in context. Indeed, as national constructions of black folklore and the black folk image were increasingly implicated in white supremacist ideologies and segregationist agendas, the Hampton Folklore Society emerged as one of the first societies comprised mainly of African Americans dedicated to the collection, preservation, and study of black folklore and cultural traditions. Like the American Folklore Society, the Hampton Folklore Society cannot be understood outside of the social, cultural, and political debates surrounding constructions of racial identity and segregation. The history of the Hampton Folklore Society, however, is predicated on the emergence of folklore studies at the Hampton Institute, which began as early as 1878 with a decidedly reformist orientation. Recovering the history of the folklore studies at the institute introduces a more specific context in which to locate the emergence of the Hampton Folklore Society, thereby allowing us to gain a deeper understanding of the range of theorizing about black folklore in relation to the racial politics of folklore studies at both the local, national, and transnational levels.